# Opera Mini OBML file format

OBML (Opera Binary Markup Language) files are self-contained, rendered versions of HTML documents generated by the Presto v2 engine. They are static, containing pixel-positioned regions adapted for a specific device's screen size & font metrics. (Thus OBML documents generated for one device tend to look slightly 'off' everywhere else, and a perfect rendering is impossible without knowing the original device.)

Over time, various OBML versions were used, and each Opera Mini version is only compatible with one OBML format, thus an upgrade might leave old saved pages unreadable. (The OBML version used can be seen by visiting `debug:`.)

Most saved pages use OBML v12, v13, v15, or v16; I haven't investigated the format used by earlier "modded" Opera Mini versions which had this feature added unofficially.

## Basic data types

OBML uses these primitive types:

 * byte – unsigned integer (1 byte)
 * short – signed integer (2 bytes, big-endian)
 * medium – signed integer (3 bytes, big-endian)
 * blob – consists of a _short_ indicating the length, followed by that many bytes of data
 * char – a _byte_ containing an ASCII character
 * string – a _blob_ containing UTF-8 encoded text

## Other data types

### url ← string

Each OBML file has a "base URL", essentially a reusable prefix. When other URLs start with a null byte, it is to be replaced with the global prefix. For example, if the base is `http://example.com/dir` and you have an URL value `\x00/index.html`, it expands to `http://example.com/dir/index.html`.

### color ← (a: byte, r: byte, g: byte, b: byte)

Colors are stored as ARGB tuples, with one byte (0–255) per component.

### coords ← (x: short, y: medium)

Coordinates are stored as a _short_ for the X position followed by a _medium_ for the Y position. The origin (0, 0) is in the top-left corner.

In format versions ≤ 13, all coordinates are absolute.

In format version ≥ 15, "size/dimension" coordinates are absolute, but "position" coordinates are relative to the previous position coordinate and may be negative.

(Note that _only_ relative coordinates update the "last position" state. Sizes/dimensions are always stored as absolute coordinates and do not affect relative coordinates.)

## Header

The file starts with a `file_size: medium` followed by `version: byte`.

In v≥15, *file_size* is always 0x02d355 and *version* is always 16; they're followed by a second identical header containing the real values. The reason for that is unknown.

Note that *file_size* only includes the bytes following it. It doesn't include the field's own size, nor the preceding fields.

Following is `page_size: coords`.

In v16, following is `unknown: bytes[3]` (always `S\x00\x00`).

Following is `unknown: short` (always -1 `\xFF\xFF`).

Following are `page_title: string`, `unknown: blob`, `page_url_base: string`, and `page_url: url`. The unknown blob seems to always start with `C\x10\x10...` on v15, empty otherwise.

Following is an unknown header (6 bytes for v≥15, 5 bytes for v≤13).

 - In v13, the format appears to be `counter: short`, `unknown: medium`.

Following is the "metadata" section and the "content" section, both composed of tagged chunks.

## Metadata section

This section consists of several chunks. Each chunk starts with `type: char` (an ASCII letter), followed by variable amount of fields.

### Metadata: 'C' chunks

In v≥15, always contain `byte[23]` of unknown data.

### Metadata: 'M' chunks

Always contain `subtype: char`, `unknown: byte` (always 0x00), `data: blob`.

#### 'S' sub-type

Secure connection (TLS) information. Contains `byte[6]`, `cert_expiry: string`, `secure_status: string`, `tls_details: string`, `cert_common_name: string`.

### Metadata: 'S' chunks

Appear to contain `links_size: medium` followed by a "links" sub-section of that size.

## Links sub-section

This section consists of chunks and appears to be a sub-section of the preceding 'S' chunk.

### Links: '\x00' chunks

Always contain `unknown: byte` and `count: byte`, followed by that many `(id: string, label: string)` pairs. Each of these chunks seems to store the `<option>` choices for a HTML `<select>` widget.

### Links: all region chunks

Most other chunks in this sub-section define 'regions' and share the same data format.

In v≥15 the format is `box_count: byte`, followed by that many `(pos: coords[rel], size: coords)` coordinate pairs, followed by `link_target: blob`, `unknown: byte[2]` (always `\x01\x74`), `link_type: blob`.

In v13 the format is `box_count: byte`, followed by that many `(pos: coords, size: coords)` coordinate pairs, followed by `link_target: blob`, `unknown: byte[2]`, `link_type: blob`.

In v12 the format is `box_count: byte`, followed by that many `(pos: coords, size: coords)` pairs, followed by `link_type: blob`, `link_target: blob`.

`link_type`, if non-empty, seems to be a _string_ with the MIME type.

`link_target` can be an _url_, a _string_, or an unknown blob.

### Links: 'I', 'N', 'S', chunks

Unknown region types. These follow the "region chunk" format.

### Links: 'C' chunks

In v≥15, an unknown region type. In v12, `unknown: byte[24]`; likely to also be a region type but I haven't checked yet.

### Links: 'i' chunks

Image region (`link_target: url` links to the original image). Note that this doesn't actually render an image, only define a link region for the original URL. The image itself is drawn by the content section.

### Links: 'L' chunks

Link region (`link_target: url` is the link target). Note that this isn't directly associated with link text in any way; it merely defines the 'active' rectangle overlayed on top of the text.

URLs starting with `b:` seem to be JavaScript links.

### Links: 'P' chunks

Link region similar to 'L' but containing a "platform" link (usually `mailto:`).

### Links: 'w' chunks

Link region similar to 'L' but meant to trigger a file download dialog (for image "Save" buttons). The target URL is hosted by the Opera Mini proxy, and expires after some time.

### Links: 'W' chunks

Link region similar to 'w' but meant to open the target in platform's native web browser (for image "Open" buttons).

## Content section

### Content: 'B' chunks

Define a filled rectangle (a "box"); used to draw background colors, borders, other lines (including even link underlines).

In v≥15, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `fill: color`.

In v≤13, contain `pos: coords`, `size: coords`, `fill: color`.

### Content: 'F' chunks

Form fields.

In v≥15, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `foreground: color`, `type: byte[2]`, `field_id: string`, `value: string`, `byte[5]`.

In v≤13, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `foreground: color`, `type: byte[2]`, `field_id: string`, `value: string`, `byte[3]`.

Types:

 - `a` is a multi-line input box (textarea)
 - `c` is a checkbox
 - `r` is a radio button
 - `x` is a single-line input box
 - `s` is a select drop-down

### Content: 'I' chunks

Image.

In v16, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `fill: color`, `file_addr: medium`, `unknown: byte[11]`.

In v15, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `fill: color`, `unknown: byte[14]`.

In v≤13, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `fill: color`, `unknown: byte[3]`, `file_addr: medium`.

*fill* is the image's average color, for use as placeholder when images are disabled/loading.

*file_addr* is the byte offset within the 'S'-chunk, relative to the end of *data_size*.

### Content: 'L' chunks

Unknown. Contain `byte[9]` with unknown data.

### Content: 'M' chunks

Unknown. Contain `byte[2]`, `blob` with unknown data.

### Content: 'o' chunks

Not sure if an actual chunk, or just part of the preceding 'I'-chunk.

Contain `blob` with unknown data.

### Content: 'S' chunks

Embedded images.

Contain `data_size: medium`, followed by some number of `file_data: blob`. (The blob count isn't given, so keep reading blobs until you've consumed at least *data_size* bytes.)

Each blob contains an image (PNG or JPEG) to be drawn in all 'I'-chunks whose *file_addr* matches the blob's offset relative to the end of *data_size*.

### Content: 'T' chunks

Text.

In v16, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `foreground: color`, `unknown: byte`, `font: byte`, `unknown_count: byte`, *unknown_count* × `(byte, blob)` pairs, `text: string`. (It seems that the unknown pairs define some sort of links.)

In v15, contain `pos: coords[rel]`, `size: coords`, `foreground: color`, `font: byte`, `text: string`.

In v≤13, contain `pos: coords`, `size: coords`, `foreground: color`, `font: byte`, `text: string`.

In *font*, the least-significant bit indicates bold text. With the 'bold' bit masked out, the remaining value indicates the font size:

  * `0` – medium (approx. 11px)
  * `2` – large (approx. 12px)
  * `4` – extra large (approx. 13px)
  * `6` – small (approx. 10px)

The following CSS results in an acceptable rendering:

    font-family: sans-serif;
    line-height: 1.1;
    white-space: pre;

### Content: 'z' chunks

Unknown. Rare. The only occurence seen contains `byte[6]`.

## Miscellaneous notes

### Forms

Form buttons do not have special representation, they just consist of an image + text + link region, using special `b:…` URLs.

Input fields and select dropdowns haven't been fully researched yet.
